https://www.facebook.com/CEGPNationalOffice/photos/a.10152009626900458/10156746811860458

𝗔𝗟𝗘𝗥𝗧: Joshua Molo, editor-in-chief of UE Dawn, the official student publication of the University of the East, was forced to apologize in public over a Facebook post criticizing the Duterte administration's negligence amid the coronavirus pandemic.

This happened after Molo argued with his former high school teachers, who were offended by Molo's online post.

At around 1:00 p.m. today, April 5, barangay officials of Cabiao, Nueva Ecija, escorted Molo, together with her mother, who is also an officer of their barangay.

Meanwhile, one of Molo's former journalism teachers, namely, Jun Ainne Francisco went to their barangay hall in San Fernando Sur to ask for blotter. Molo was accused of cyber libel because he called out his teachers for making fun of his earlier post.

"Inaamin ko po na ako ay nagkamali, at hindi na muling mauulit ang pangyayari," said Molo in his public apology posted online.

Moreover, Molo’s case is not the first recorded attack against press freedom this time of the pandemic.

On March 25, Today's Carolinian (TC), the official student publication of the University of San Carlos, published an article condemning the order of Cebu Governor Gwendolyn Garcia against its critics for tracing individuals who will criticize the government’s actions against the COVID-19.

Garcia also commented to the article, inviting the editor-in-chief of TC, Berns Mitra, to discuss the matter, which is a clear manifestation to intimidate her critics.

The College Editors Guild of the Philippines, the oldest, broadest, and only-existing alliance of tertiary student publications in Southeast Asia, vehemently condemns this blatant suppression against the people's democratic rights.

At a time when our country needs checks and balances, especially when Congress just granted Duterte additional powers despite the lack of concrete plans to solve COVID-19, we need a free flow of democracy. Additionally, it is the decisive role and constitutional right of the Filipino people to partake in a proactive stance in pursuing a just and genuine social reform.

"Instead of filing nonsensical criminal charges, the government should work on improving a coordinated and sustained public information campaign and immediately deliver economic assistance and services to everyone," said CEGP National President Daryl Angelo Baybado.

Now, more than, ever, we need to fight and resist all forms of suppression that trample our right to free speech. We will never succumb to any deleterious pronouncement and threat.

"Amid the heightened attempts to gag the people's right to speech, the Guild and its member publications will never let this pass," he added.

"Let the lapdogs and oppressors of Duterte be reminded that from these attacks, more and more Filipino people, especially from the ranks of campus publications, will continue to fight back and expose his tyrannical rule."

#DefendPressFreedom