https://www.facebook.com/phkule/photos/a.130663580347931/2837995919614670

Facing threats of online libel, editor-in-chief Joshua Molo of the University of the East (UE) Dawn was pressured to publicly apologize after a heated exchange with his former teachers following his Facebook posts criticizing the government’s inadequate efforts amid the COVID-19 pandemic.

In an online interview with the Collegian, Molo said he was summoned to the barangay hall after some of the teachers had reported the incident to Barangay San Fernando Sur in Cabiao, Nueva Ecija.

Shortly after, Molo posted a video on his Facebook account, apologizing to the seven teachers he argued with. Had he refused, he would have faced an online libel suit instead. Hours later, his former teacher who demanded the apology asked Molo to take down the video, according to Jon Callueng from local human rights watchdog Karapatan

“Ang paghatol at sapilitang pagsasagawa ng public apology ni Molo … ay paglabag sa Saligang Batas at pag-abuso sa kapangyarihan ng pamahalaan,” the UE University Student Council, and Debate and Speech Society said in a joint statement. “Ang direktang pagtapak sa karapatan ng mamamayang Pilipino ay kailanman hindi katanggap-tanggap sa isang demokratikong bansa tulad ng Pilipinas.”

In addition, Molo was also told not to criticize the government anymore—an order in clear violation of his right to free speech and expression.

“Dissenters are always subject to grave threats because of simply expressing themselves. It is even more alarming that teachers are the ones who prompt this to happen because as educators, they are supposed to engage it and challenge it,” said Daryl Baybado, national president of the College Editors Guild of the Philippines.

“As educators, they should make immense [efforts] in facilitating the transition of the youth from being critical, especially at a time of tyranny,” he added.

Earlier this week, Molo took his rage and frustration to social media over the government’s ill-conceived and frail efforts to reach out to the people amid the pandemic. Some of his former elementary and high school teachers responded negatively, telling him to support the government instead.

In a Facebook story he posted April 2, Molo lamented his teachers’ reaction, citing the privileged background they have, which could be the reason why they failed to understand the college editor’s position.

“I know what I am saying. The more I read every day, the more I see there is something wrong, and I am directly affected by it,” Molo said. “Now that I have learned to speak up in a better way, there’s no turning back.”

The heated exchange went on, after his teachers reportedly made fun of his earlier statements in a Facebook thread. “I am so disappointed that my former campus journalism teachers are making fun of my recent statements just because they are obviously slapped by it,” Molo said in a separate Facebook story he shared. “Maybe the ‘campus journalism’ they are upholding only exists for contests, for bragging rights."

Such efforts to silence the press just proves there is a de facto martial rule in the country, said Baybado. But amid all these attacks, student journalists must continue to take a stand and refrain from tolerating these acts.

“If we will just condone this, we are allowing to propagate a culture of impunity where the state is using its current power to control the press. Campus publications must take a stand and let our collective voices of condemnation of attacks against press freedom be heard,” Baybado said.