https://www.facebook.com/ue.cbasc/posts/2893724917377767

WE ARE NOT THE ENEMY.

The College of Business Administration Student Council together with Registered Student Organizations, strongly condemn the acts against our fellow CBA Warrior, Joshua Molo, which showed oppression, abuse of power, and violation of human rights. We strongly stand and support Molo for the bravery that he expressed.

Molo, the Editor-in-Chief of UE Dawn, was summoned earlier today, April 5, 2020, by the barangay officials of Cabiao, Nueva Ecija for criticizing the Duterte Administration.

His former high school professors were “offended” after expressing his opinions on social media against President Duterte. Thereafter, Molo still managed to stand up for what he believed is right which affronted them.

With this, Molo was allegedly forced to make a public apology and was threatened to be ARRESTED if he will continue to criticize the government. His video was eventually asked to be taken down by his former high school professor who filed the complaint and demanded the public apology.

We must remember that every Filipino has the right to support and freely criticize the actions of the government. We should not prevent anyone from expressing their thoughts and grievances for the government.

Article 1 Section 1:

“No person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process of
law, nor shall any person be denied the equal protection of the laws.”

Article 3 Section 4:

“No law shall be passed abridging the freedom of speech, of expression, or of
the press, or the right of the people peaceably to assemble and petition the government
for redress of grievances.”

Article 3 Section 12:

“(2) No torture, force, violence, threat, intimidation, or any other means which vitiate the
free will shall be used against him. Secret detention places, solitary, incommunicado, or
other similar forms of detention are prohibited.”

Article 3 Section 18:

“No person shall be detained solely by reason of his political beliefs and aspirations.”

#DefendYourRights
#LaBAnMandirigma

The views and opinions expressed in this page do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of University of the East